+++
draft = false
image = ""
showonlyimage = false
date = "2020-2-15T19:50:47+05:30"
title = "Algebraic Sturcture 101"
weight = 1
description = "This blog include some essential definitions and proof for algerbaic structure."
+++

Some essential definitions and proof for algerbaic structure.

## Group

1. **Group:** A group is a non-empty set $G$ with binary operation satisfying:

   1. Identity: exists $e \in G$ such as $ea = ae = a$
   2. Inverse: for each $a \in G$, exists a $b \in G$ such as $ab = ba = e$
   3. Associative: for all $a, b, c \in G$, we have $a(bc) = (ab)c$

2. **Subgroup:** If $G$ is a group and $H \subseteq G$ is a subset of $G$, then $H$ is a subgroup of a group G if it is closed under the same binary operation as $G$

3. **Cyclic subgroup:** of G generated by a: Every element in $G$ is equal to $a^n$, $n \gt 1$

4. give an example of a group that is not cyclic: $D_4$

5. **Order of a Group:** $|G|$, The number of elements of a group

6. **Order of an Element:** $|g|$, the smallest positive integer $n$ such that $g^n = e$ 

7. **Center:** $Z(G) = \{a \in G | ag = ga$ for all $g\in G\}$

8. **Show that Z(G) is a subgroup of G**

   1. Since $eg = ge = g$ for $g \in G$, 

   2. Let $a_1, a_2 \in Z(G)$, since $a_1a_2 g = a_1ga_2 = g(a_1a_2)$, $a_1a_2 \in G$

   3. Let $a \in Z(G)$, 
      $$
      ag = ga \\
      a^{-1}ag = a^{-1}ga \\
      g = a^{-1}ga \\
      ga^{-1} = a^{-1}g
      $$
      Thus, $a^{-1} \in Z(G)$

9. **One-step subgroup test:** Let $G$ be a group and $H$ a nonempty subset of $G$, $ab^{-1} \in H$ when $a, b \in H$, then $H$ is a subgroup of $G$

10. **Two-step subgroup test:** 

    1. $ab \in H$
    2. $a^{-1} \in H$

11. **Centralizer:** For $a$ in $G$, the centralizer of a in $G$, $C(a)$ is the set of all elements in $G$ that commute with $a$, $C(a) = \{g \in G | ag = ga\}$

12. **Show that C(a) is a subgroup of G**

    1. Since $ea = ae$, $e \in C(a)$

    2. Let $g_1, g_2 \in C(a)$, since $g_1g_2a = g_1ag_2 = ag_1g_2$, $g_1g_2 \in C(a)$

    3. Let $g \in C(a)$, and $g^{-1}$ be the inverse of $g$ in $G$,
       $$
       ag = ga \\
       g^{-1}agg^{-1} = g^{-1}gag^{-1} \\
       g^{-1}a = ag^{-1}
       $$

13. **The fundamental theorem of cyclic groups (Theorem 4.3):**

    1. Every subgroup of cyclic group is cyclic

    2. If $|\langle a \rangle| = n$, the order of any subgroup of $\langle a \rangle$ is a divisor of $n$
    3. For each positive divisor $k$ of $n$, the group $\langle a \rangle$ has exactly one subgroup of order $k$, $\langle a^{n/k} \rangle$

## Permutation

14. **Permutation:** a function from $A$ to $A$ that is one-to-one and onto

15. **Permutation group:** a set of permutations of $A$ that forms a group under function composition

16. multiply the following two permutations in cycle notation ....

17. write the following permutation as a product of transpositions

18. **Order of a permutation**: The order of a permutation of a finite set is the least common multiple of the lengths of the cycles

19. **Always even or always odd theorem for permutations:** If $\alpha \in S_n$, and $\alpha = t_1...t_k = s_1...s_l$, then $k$ and $l$ are both even or odd

20. **Prove cancellation in a group:**
    $$
    ab = cb \\
    abb^{-1} = cbb^{-1} \\
    a(bb^{-1}) = c(bb^{-1}) \\
    ae = ce \\
    a = c
    $$

21. **Prove uniqueness of inverse in a group:**

    Suppose $b, c$ is the inverse of $a$ in the group, since $ab = e, ac = e$, then $ab = ac$. By cancellation, $b = c$.
